# P2P Handbook

## Status: Living Document

This handbook is very much a work in progress. It's incomplete, and I'm filling
in bits and pieces as I go!

You should file issues and ask questions about aspects of p2p you're interested
in!

## THE HANDBOOK

This handbook is an introduction to the primitives of peer-to-peer systems for
the web, and a guide to the powerful abstractions you can build on top of those
primitives to form distributed systems.

This handbook's goal is to prepare you to use the excellent ecosystem of p2p
modules available on npm today, and to develop your own p2p modules and
applications on top.

### introduction

This is the handbook I wish that I had when I started delving down the
peer-to-peer rabbit hole.

what is p2p

### why you should use p2p

### why node & javascript

### what superpowers does p2p grant?

technology grants us superpowers that we would otherwise not have

- offline-first
- abstract away corporate infrastructure
- data can flow more freely

### CAP theorum

- <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CAP_theorem>
- dominictarr's article

Consistency. Availability. Partition tolerance. Choose two.

It's possible to "cheat" and get all three: _eventual consistency_

### p2p "layers" (roles)

Whereas the OSI(?) stack breaks networks into N layers (N varies between 4 and 7
depending on who you talk to), it's beneficial to think of P2P in terms of
_roles_:

(TODO: build ASCII table of role layers -- CLI tool for this?)

- applications
- protocols & data structures
- content routing
- swarm topology
- peer routing
- discovery
- identity

### identity

- how a peer uniquely identifies itself
- optional: encrypts messages, sign messages (prove it authored/certifies content)
- generally a keypair; generally generated by each node individually (no central store dependency)
- also get a listing of means of contacting that peer

### discovery

given a key, find interested peers

#### bittorrent dht

The bittorrent dht, mainline, is huge: there are millions of nodes worldwide.
You can store arbitrary data in them, but be warned that most nodes are
configured to aggressively flush keypairs they receive.

This approach is great when the swarm lacks the resources to maintain a powerful
reliable central server for discovery -- a DHT is an excellent means for free
short-term storage of peer location information. Because of its low retention
duration, it may be required for peers to republish their contact information at
a regular interval.

 - dht
 - discovery-channel
 - webtorrent

#### tracker / signal server

Run a centralized server(s) at some known IP that many other peers also connect
to. This server can act as a connection broker, exchanging ip:ports of peers to
help them connect to each other directly.

This is also a partially effective means of traversing around certain types of
NATs.

This approach need not be centralized: bittorrent employs a decentralized set of
trackers, which peers are free to decide between to use for discovery.

This is useful when your potential swarm size is small, and your potential peers
are located broadly across the open internet and require very accessible points
(maybe served over port 80) to find.

 - signalhub

#### multicast dns

Multicast DNS is a very well supported protocol (bonjour/zeroconf+apple/airplay,
etc) for finding other machines that are on the same network as you.

It consists of sending a "query" message to the entire network. Based on its
contents, machines who believe themselves applicable can respond with their
information to facilitate direct contact between the two.

This is useful when your peers are likely to be on the same network as you.

 - mdns
 - discovery-channel

#### static bootstrap list

When all else fails, you can still ship your application with a list of
hardcoded peer locations, to help peers join the larger network. This could be
as simple as

```json
[
  "QmVvUkSZqM2EG1SK9s49uN6pizNhXVFHpuJgh53my4A4pP": "tcp://12.62.93.214:9090",
  "QmawE3T8oyxMgz5KaYvsJ2BgQUZWvnKzebwLhqGPA8sqGb": "udp://24.243.12.9:1234",
  "QmQXV24ZjKPGiXfeQd4etZGgywzd4wfaGKGS48EGVdrS6C": "utp://99.4.78.181:97"
]
```

#### dns

Store peer IDs and IP addresses as low-TTL DNS entries (dns round robin). This
relies on DNS' peer-to-peer-like record dissemination protocol to propagate new
peers over the time domain.

This requires a central service that would function a lot like a tracker: it
needs to both a) maintain a subset of active peers in the swarm, and b) publish
a further subset of them to a DNS server.

This approach is so useful because your peer application doesn't even need to
understand p2p protocols: it can just connect to some known example.com and get
a new peer every time it connects.

 - Q: any modules for publishing round robin dns entries?

### peer routing

given a peer-id and peer-info, get a duplex stream

"with this piece: what if we could map a public key to a duplex stream, across the world?"

sub-topics
  - NAT hole-punching
  - relaying

### swarm / topology

- the topology of peers in the network
- <http://blog.daviddias.me/2014/12/20/webrtc-ring>

1.  structured
  - fully-connected-topology
  - kademlia
  - chord
2.  unstructured
  - signalhub
  - bittorrent swarm

### content routing

given a message, figure out which peers to route it to
^ need to get a more solid understanding on this

1.  examples
    1.  gossip
        1.  secure-gossip
        2.  hyperlog / ssb (anti-entropy)

### p2p data structures

data structures well suited to an unreliable network (or offline) with untrusted peers

1. stream
2. crdt
  - <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conflict-free_replicated_data_type>
  - <https://github.com/pfraze/crdt_notes>
3. append-only log
  1. hyperlog
  2. secure-scuttlebutt <https://scuttlebot.io/more/protocols/secure-scuttlebutt.html>
4. content addressable store
5. merkle linking (blockchain, hyperlog, ssb, etc)
  a. merkle dag (ipfs)
7. dht

#### other handy not-strictly-p2p modules

1. leveldb
2. abstract-blob-store

### protocol

what messages the peers of the network agree to exchange

1. streams: the ultimate transport-agnostic abstraction
2. multistream: multiplexing protocols over a stream

### awesome p2p modules

TODO: sort these into their respective sections? or have tiny per-module bits?

- signalhub (peer discovery)
- hyperlog (identity, data structure, protocol)
- discovery-channel (peer discovery)
- discovery-swarm (peer discovery + content routing + swarm)
- bittorrent-dht (peer discovery + swarm)
- ssb-keys (identity)
- pubsub-swarm (identity, peer discovery, swarm, content routing)
- secure-gossip (content routing, protocol)

### glueing p2p modules together to make apps

1. p2p picture sharing service (walk through glueing together modules from the
   roles to do this)


## Inspiration

- <https://github.com/ipfs/specs/tree/master/libp2p>
- <https://github.com/mafintosh/p2p-workshop>
- <https://github.com/substack/stream-handbook>
- <https://ipfs.io>
- <https://github.com/dominictarr/>
- <https://github.com/diasdavid/>
- <https://github.com/mafintosh/>
- <https://github.com/jbenet/>
- <https://github.com/substack/>

